Whats new for Compose 1.6.0 (#77)
JetBrains/kotlin-multiplatform-dev-docs: topics/whats-new/whats-new-compose-1-6-0.md

[//]: # (title: Compose Multiplatform 1.6.0)

The Compose Multiplatform 1.6.0 release is out. Here are the highlights:

* [New and improved Resources API](#improved-resources-api-all-platforms)
* [Basic support for iOS accessibility features](#ios-accessibility-support)
* [UI testing API](#ui-testing-api-experimental-all-platforms)

> * Jetpack Compose 1.6.1 was merged into Compose Multiplatform. Here is a [summary of changes](#jetpack-compose-1-6-1-merged-all-platforms)

Reviewer: We have found a link to the material3 1.2 as well: https://material.io/blog/material-3-compose-1-2.

It is worth to add it to the What's new. Maybe even describe the changes as we done that with main Compose.

## Dependencies

This version of Compose Multiplatform is based on the following Jetpack Compose libraries:

* [Compiler 1.5.8](https://developer.android.com/jetpack/androidx/releases/compose-compiler#1.5.8)
* [Runtime 1.6.1](https://developer.android.com/jetpack/androidx/releases/compose-runtime#1.6.1)
* [UI 1.6.1](https://developer.android.com/jetpack/androidx/releases/compose-ui#1.6.1)
* [Foundation 1.6.1](https://developer.android.com/jetpack/androidx/releases/compose-foundation#1.6.1)
* [Material 1.6.1](https://developer.android.com/jetpack/androidx/releases/compose-material#1.6.1)
* [Material3 1.2.0](https://developer.android.com/jetpack/androidx/releases/compose-material3#1.2.0)

## Breaking changes

### Padding for text with lineHeight set is trimmed by default

With the added support for [LineHeightStyle.Trim](https://developer.android.com/reference/kotlin/androidx/compose/ui/text/style/LineHeightStyle.Trim)
Compose Multiplatform aligns with Android in the way text padding is trimmed.
See [the pull request](https://github.com/JetBrains/compose-multiplatform-core/pull/897) for details.

### Using fontSize in MaterialTheme now needs lineHeight as well

> If you set the `fontSize` attribute for a `Text` component in MaterialTheme but don't include `lineHeight`, actual line

Reviewer 2: Also, I'd mention that it's only about `material`, but not `material3`. `material3` had such behavior already

* [BasicTextField2](https://github.com/JetBrains/compose-multiplatform/issues/4218)
* [Support for nonlinear font scaling](https://github.com/JetBrains/compose-multiplatform/issues/4305)
* [MultiParagraph.fillBoundingBoxes](https://github.com/JetBrains/compose-multiplatform/issues/4236)
* [Multiplatform Drag and drop](https://github.com/JetBrains/compose-multiplatform/issues/4235). Works only for Android
right now. For Desktop, you can use an existing API, `Modifier.onExternalDrag`.

The JetBrains team is working on adopting these features in upcoming versions of Compose Multiplatform.

### Separate platform views for popups, dialogs, and dropdowns (iOS, experimental on Desktop)

Sometimes it’s important that popup elements (for example, tooltips and dropdown menus) are not limited by initial
Compose canvas or the app window. This becomes especially relevant if the Compose view is not occupying the full screen,
but needs to spawn an alert dialog. In 1.6.0 there is a way to reliably achieve that.

Note that popups and dialogs are still unable to draw anything out of their own bounds (for example, a shadow of the topmost container).

> On iOS, the feature is available by default. To use the feature with Compose Multiplatform for Desktop, set the `compose.layers.type`

Reviewer 2: Please document a way how to switch to old behavior for the iOS (`latformLayers = false`) See https://github.com/JetBrains/compose-multiplatform-core/pull/1031 for details

system property. Supported values:

> * `COMPONENT`, for creating `Popup` or `Dialog` as a separate Swing component in the same window. ??? It might work only with offscreen rendering.

Reviewer 2: Offscreen rendering (`compose.swing.render.on.graphics`) property is documented in 1.5.0 blogpost - https://blog.jetbrains.com/kotlin/2023/08/compose-multiplatform-1-5-0-release/#enhanced-swing-interop

Please note that `compose.swing.render.on.graphics` works only for `ComposePanel` but not for full window compose application

fun main() = SwingUtilities.invokeLater {
    System.setProperty("compose.swing.render.on.graphics", "true")
    System.setProperty("compose.layers.type", "COMPONENT")

    val window = JFrame()
    window.defaultCloseOperation = WindowConstants.EXIT_ON_CLOSE

    val contentPane = JLayeredPane()
    contentPane.layout = null

    val composePanel = ComposePanel()
    composePanel.setBounds(200, 200, 200, 200)
    composePanel.setContent {
        ComposeContent()
    }
    composePanel.windowContainer = contentPane  // Use the full window for dialogs
    contentPane.add(composePanel)
    
    window.contentPane.add(contentPane)
    window.setSize(800, 600)
    window.isVisible = true
}

@Composable
fun ComposeContent() {
    Box(Modifier.fillMaxSize().background(Color.Green)) {
        Dialog(onDismissRequest = {}) {
            Box(Modifier.size(100.dp).background(Color.Yellow))
        }
    }
}

```

### Support for text decoration line styles (iOS, Desktop, Web)

Compose Multiplatform now allows setting underline styles for text using the `PlatformTextStyle` class:

```kotlin
Text(
    "Hello, Compose",
    style = TextStyle(
        textDecoration = TextDecoration.Underline,

>         platformStyle = PlatformTextStyle(

Reviewer 2: We need to mention that this code is platform specific and NOT available in common sourceset

            textDecorationLineStyle = TextDecorationLineStyle.Dotted
        )
    )
)
```

You can use solid, double-width solid, dotted, dashed, and wavy line style. All available options can be found in
[the source code](https://github.com/JetBrains/compose-multiplatform-core/blob/jb-main/compose/ui/ui-text/src/skikoMain/kotlin/androidx/compose/ui/text/TextDecorationLineStyle.kt#L21).

> ### Add a way to use fonts installed on the system (Desktop, Web)

Reviewer 2: iOS works too

* Jetpack Compose 1.6.1 and Material 3 1.2.0 were merged into Compose Multiplatform. Here is a [summary of changes](#changes-from-jetpack-compose-and-material-3-all-platforms)
  with comments on what this means for Compose Multiplatform consumers.
* [Compose Multiplatform for Web (Wasm) artifacts are available with the stable version of the framework](#compose-multiplatform-for-web-wasm-artifacts-are-available-with-the-stable-version-of-the-framework).

## Dependencies

This version of Compose Multiplatform is based on the following Jetpack Compose libraries:

* [Compiler 1.5.8](https://developer.android.com/jetpack/androidx/releases/compose-compiler#1.5.8)
* [Runtime 1.6.1](https://developer.android.com/jetpack/androidx/releases/compose-runtime#1.6.1)
* [UI 1.6.1](https://developer.android.com/jetpack/androidx/releases/compose-ui#1.6.1)
* [Foundation 1.6.1](https://developer.android.com/jetpack/androidx/releases/compose-foundation#1.6.1)
* [Material 1.6.1](https://developer.android.com/jetpack/androidx/releases/compose-material#1.6.1)
* [Material3 1.2.0](https://developer.android.com/jetpack/androidx/releases/compose-material3#1.2.0)

## Breaking changes

> ### Padding for text with lineHeight set is trimmed by default

Reviewer 3: Just to keep headers consistent, currently, there is a mix of noun phrases and full sentences with verbs

> With the added support for [LineHeightStyle.Trim](https://developer.android.com/reference/kotlin/androidx/compose/ui/text/style/LineHeightStyle.Trim)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
With the added support for [LineHeightStyle.Trim](https://developer.android.com/reference/kotlin/androidx/compose/ui/text/style/LineHeightStyle.Trim),
```

Compose Multiplatform aligns with Android in the way text padding is trimmed.
See [the pull request](https://github.com/JetBrains/compose-multiplatform-core/pull/897) for details.

This is in line with `compose.material` changes from [the 1.6.0-alpha01 release](https://developer.android.com/jetpack/androidx/releases/compose-material#1.6.0-alpha01):
* The `includeFontPadding` parameter became `false` by default in Material 2.
  For a deeper understanding of this change, see [the discussion on not implementing this flag in Compose Multiplatform](https://github.com/JetBrains/compose-multiplatform/issues/2477#issuecomment-1825716543).
* The default line height style has been changed to `Trim.None` and `Alignment.Center`. Compose Multiplatform now supports
  `LineHeightStyle.Trim` and implements `Trim.None` as the default value.
* Explicit `lineHeight` have been added to `TextStyle` of `Typography`, which led to the [next breaking change](#using-fontsize-in-materialtheme-now-needs-lineheight-as-well).

### Using fontSize in MaterialTheme now needs lineHeight as well

> This affects only `material` components. `material3` already had this restriction.
>
{type="note"}

> If you set the `fontSize` attribute for a `Text` component in `MaterialTheme` but don't include `lineHeight`, actual line

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
If you set the `fontSize` attribute for a `Text` component in `MaterialTheme` but don't include `lineHeight`, the actual line
```

height will not be modified to match the font. Now, you have to explicitly specify the `lineHeight` attribute every time you
set the corresponding `fontSize`.

> Jetpack Compose now [recommends](https://issuetracker.google.com/issues/321872412) not setting the font size directly:

Reviewer 3: We don't usually introduce notes. You can just include it in the note, like "Following Jetpack Compose recommendations, we also encourage users.."

> >To support non-standard text sizes, we encourage users to follow the Material design system and use a different [type scale](https://m2.material.io/design/typography/the-type-system.html#type-scale)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
> To support non-standard text sizes, we encourage users to follow the Material design system and use a different [type scale](https://m2.material.io/design/typography/the-type-system.html#type-scale)
```

> > rather than changing the font size directly. Alternatively, users can overwrite the line height like so:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
> rather than change the font size directly. Alternatively, users can overwrite the line height like this:
```

> > `style = LocalTextStyle.current.copy(lineHeight = TextUnit.Unspecified)`, or create a custom `Typography` entirely.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
> `style = LocalTextStyle.current.copy(lineHeight = TextUnit.Unspecified)` or create a custom `Typography` entirely.
```

> 

Reviewer 3: {type="tip"}

### New approach to resource organization

If you have been using the Resources API in preview versions of Compose Multiplatform 1.6.0, familiarize yourself with
[the documentation for the current version](compose-images-resources.md): 1.6.0-beta01 changed the way resource files
should be stored in the project folders to be available to the project code.

## Across platforms

### Improved Resources API (all platforms)

The new experimental API adds support for strings and fonts, and allows you to more comfortably share and access resources

> in common Kotlin:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
in common Kotlin more comfortably:
```

  * Instead of a single surface value, there are now several options for surface color and surface container, for more
    flexible color management.

For more details on changes in Material 3, see [the release post on the Material Design Blog](https://material.io/blog/material-3-compose-1-2).

### Separate platform views for popups, dialogs, and dropdowns (iOS, Desktop)

Sometimes it’s important that popup elements (for example, tooltips and dropdown menus) are not limited by initial
Compose canvas or the app window. This becomes especially relevant if the Compose view is not occupying the full screen,

> but needs to spawn an alert dialog. In 1.6.0 there is a way to reliably achieve that.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
but needs to spawn an alert dialog. In 1.6.0, there is a way to achieve that reliably.
```

Note that popups and dialogs are still unable to draw anything out of their own bounds (for example, a shadow of the topmost container).

#### iOS (stable)

On iOS, the feature is active by default.
To switch back to the old behavior, set the `platformLayers` parameter to `false`:

```kotlin
ComposeUIViewController(
  configure = {
    platformLayers = false
  }
) {
  // your Compose code
}
```

#### Desktop (experimental)

> To use the feature with Compose Multiplatform for Desktop, set the `compose.layers.type`

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
To use the feature on desktop, set the `compose.layers.type`
```

system property. Supported values:
* `WINDOW`, for creating `Popup` and `Dialog` components as separate undecorated windows.
* `COMPONENT`, for creating `Popup` or `Dialog` as a separate Swing component in the same window. It works only with offscreen
  rendering, with `compose.swing.render.on.graphics` set to `true` (see the [Enhanced Swing interop](https://blog.jetbrains.com/kotlin/2023/08/compose-multiplatform-1-5-0-release/#enhanced-swing-interop)
  section of the 1.5.0 Compose Multiplatform release notes). Note that offscreen rendering only works for `ComposePanel`

>   components, not for full window Compose applications.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  components, not full window applications.
```

> Example of the code that uses the `COMPONENT` property:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
An example of the code that uses the `COMPONENT` property:
```

    contentPane.layout = null

    val composePanel = ComposePanel()
    composePanel.setBounds(200, 200, 200, 200)
    composePanel.setContent {
        ComposeContent()
    }
    composePanel.windowContainer = contentPane  // Use the full window for dialogs
    contentPane.add(composePanel)
    
    window.contentPane.add(contentPane)
    window.setSize(800, 600)
    window.isVisible = true
}

@Composable
fun ComposeContent() {
    Box(Modifier.fillMaxSize().background(Color.Green)) {
        Dialog(onDismissRequest = {}) {
            Box(Modifier.size(100.dp).background(Color.Yellow))
        }
    }
}
```
{initial-collapse-state="collapsed"  collapsed-title="val window = JFrame()"}

The `Dialog` (yellow) is drawn in full, regardless of the bounds of the parent `ComposePanel` (green):

![Dialog outside the bounds of the parent panel](compose-desktop-separate-dialog.png)

### Support for text decoration line styles (iOS, Desktop, Web)

Compose Multiplatform now allows setting underline styles for text using the `PlatformTextStyle` class.

> The class is not available in the common source set and needs to be called in platform-specific code.
>
{type="warning"}

> Example of setting a dotted underline style:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
An example of setting a dotted underline style:
```

```kotlin
Text(
    "Hello, Compose",
    style = TextStyle(
        textDecoration = TextDecoration.Underline,
        platformStyle = PlatformTextStyle(
            textDecorationLineStyle = TextDecorationLineStyle.Dotted
        )
    )
)
```

> You can use solid, double-width solid, dotted, dashed, and wavy line style. All available options can be found in

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
You can use solid, double-width solid, dotted, dashed, and wavy line styles. See all available options in
```

* Long tap and drag in a text field leads to moving the cursor, not entering selection mode like on Android.

## Web

### Compose Multiplatform for Web (Wasm) artifacts are available with the stable version of the framework

Stable version of Compose Multiplatform for Web supports Kotlin/Wasm targets now. After you switch to 1.6.0, you don't
have to specify a particular `dev-wasm` version of the `compose-ui` library in your list of dependencies.

> To build Compose Multiplatform with a Wasm target, you need to have a Kotlin version no older than 1.9.22.
>
{type="warning"}

## Known issues and solutions

### Missing dependencies

There are a couple of libraries that can be missing with a default project configuration:

* `org.jetbrains.compose.annotation-internal:annotation` or `org.jetbrains.compose.collection-internal:collection`

  These may be missing if a library depends on Compose Multiplatform 1.6.0-beta02, which isn't binary compatible with 1.6.0.
  To figure out which library that is, run this command (replace `shared` with the name of your main module):

  ```shell
  ./gradlew shared:dependencies
  ```

>   Downgrade the library to a version depending on Compose Multiplatform 1.5.12, or ask the library author to upgrade it

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  Downgrade the library to a version depending on Compose Multiplatform 1.5.12 or ask the library author to upgrade it
```

Compose Multiplatform aligns with Android in the way text padding is trimmed.
See [the pull request](https://github.com/JetBrains/compose-multiplatform-core/pull/897) for details.

This is in line with `compose.material` changes from [the 1.6.0-alpha01 release](https://developer.android.com/jetpack/androidx/releases/compose-material#1.6.0-alpha01):

> * The `includeFontPadding` parameter became `false` by default in Material 2.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* The `includeFontPadding` parameter became `false` on Android by default.
```
(it affects not only Material 2)

### Add a way to use fonts installed on the system (Desktop, Web, iOS)

> > The feature will be supported on iOS in the next release. There are no plans for Android support.

Reviewer 2: It's been supported in iOS since 1.6.0-beta02

FontFamily(SystemFont("Webdings"))
```

On desktop, you can use the `FontFamily` function to load all possible font styles by specifying a font family name only

> (see [the code sample](https://github.com/JetBrains/compose-multiplatform-core/blob/jb-main/compose/desktop/desktop/samples/src/jvmMain/kotlin/androidx/compose/desktop/examples/fonts/Fonts.jvm.kt)

Reviewer 2: Please provide a link to a specific commit or at least to 1.6 branch - currently it points to `jb-main` that **will** be changed
